
4

Automatic Zoom
Experiment 9: Stereo Mixer, Equalizer, and
Amplifier
9.1 Background
So far in lab, you have built and tested simple RC filters, a bandpass filter, and several
op-amp amplifiers. We’re going to put these all together with an analog power amplifier to
build a mini audio system.
This lab is here for two reasons.
1. To see some of the things from lab in a real-life application
2. To have fun
To this end, there’s no pre- or post-lab work this week. If you come to lab and complete
the work, you’ll get full points this week. Spend your pre- and post-lab time worrying about
your project.
The complete circuit is shown in Figure 9.1. We have created the majority of this on a
custom PCB, as shown in Figure 9.2. Throughout the board, we have installed test points
for you to easily access signals in the circuit. These are small metal loops standing out of
the board. One of these is circled in yellow in Figure 9.2.
9.2 Power Amplifier
The circuit in the top left of your board is the power stage to drive your speaker. This is
necessary due to the current capability of the 741 amp, which is limited at around 20mA. If
we want to drive the speaker with any real volume, we need more current than an op-amp
can provide. Thus, the final stage amplifies the signal from our audio circuit with the two
transistors. The circuit is shown in detail in Figure 9.3.
Notice that the feedback to the op-amp is from the transistor output, and not the op-amp
output. Why do you think this is? Hint: Think about the purpose of feedback in a regulation
system. Why would we want to see the signal to the speaker as feedback instead of the signal
to the amplifier? This is relevant to your final project!
The power amplifier is wired and complete; there’s no work to do in this section.
1
Figure 9.1: Lab Audio System Schematic
2
Figure 9.2: Lab Audio System PCB
3
Figure 9.3: Power Amp Schematic
9.3 Stereo Mixer
Most audio jacks are stereo, but we only have one speaker, so the first step is to combine the
left and right channels to a single signal for processing before sending it to the speaker.
Figure 9.4: Summing Amplifier
Recall the circuit in Figure 9.4, which we build previously this semester. The full equation
was
Vout = V1R2 + V2R1
R1 + R2
× (1 + R4
R3
) (9.1)
By using a voltage follower, as in Figure 9.5, we get the weighted average of the two channels
passed to the output:
4
Figure 9.5: Dual Summer With 0.5x Gain
Vout = V1R2 + V2R1
R1 + R2
× (1 + 0
∞ ) = V1R2 + V2R1
R1 + R2
(9.2)
Replacing R1 and R2 with a pot, as in Figure 9.6, we can vary the balance between the two
inputs.
Figure 9.6: Dual Summer With Adjustable Balance
Figure 9.7 shows the dual summing circuit on the PCB. We have allowed for two different
inputs: Either a pair of FG channels, or the ”headphones” output from the lab computers.
We’ll first use the FG channels to test the amplifier and play some sound, while considering
the effects of constructive and destructive interference. Note the test point (a small metal
loop) near the L/R balance adjustment (see Figure 9.7).
1. Connect probes to Ch1 and Ch2 on the scope. Set factory defauls on the scope, and
set the probe switches and scope scaling to 1x.
2. CAREFULLY connect the Ch2 scope probe to the test point circled in blue in Figure
9.7, and then connect the Ch1 probe to the test point for the speaker, circled in yellow
in Figure 9.2.
3. Turn on the FG, scope, and power supply.
4. Set the power supply Ch2 and Ch3 to 15V and 20mA.
5. Set the left-right balancing pot to approximately 50%, and set the input select switch
to Function Generator.
6. Turn the pot in the power amplifier (R16) fully counterclockwise.
7. Set both FG channels to HiZ.
5
